feat(adr): add ADR for device profile changes (#605)
edgexfoundry/edgex-docs: docs_src/design/adr/device-service/0021-Profile-Changes.md

# Rules on Changes to a Device Profile

## Status

** Proposed **
(as of 10/11/21)

## Context

While the device profile has always been the way to describe a device/sensor and template its communications to the rest of the system, over the course of EdgeX evolution there have been changes in what could change in a profile or its associations.  This document is meant to address the issue of change surrounding device profiles in EdgeX going forward.

### Profile Changes

The table below outlines the current elements of the EdgeX device profile, and the circumstances allowed for change (accomplished via PUT update API call - whether that is add, update or delete elements where applicable).

| Device Profile Property | Type | Allowed Change | Description/Comments |
|-------------------------|------|----------------|----------------------|
| *General Properties* ||||
| Id | string | Never | This uuid is generated by EdgeX and uniquely identifies the profile. |

> | Name | string | When unassociated | This required property must be unique to the EdgeX instance and cannot be changed when the profile is associated to a device, reading or event.  The profile name can never be empty and must be unique across the entire EdgeX instance. |

Reviewer: We are not currently able to change the name and furthermore, the  schema for the `PUT /deviceprofile` method requires *both* ID and name to be specified: _"A request to update an existing device profile definition. 'id' and 'name' must be populated in order to identify the profile. Any other property that is populated in the request will be updated."_

| Name | string | Situational | When the device profile is not associated to any device, reading or event, this field can be modified.  It can never be blank and must be unique across the entire profile. |
| IsHidden | bool | Anytime | This field allows the device resource to be exposed (default) via the command service.  This change does not affect the behavior but only visibility.  This field is optional but is false by default when not provided. |
| Tag | string | Situational | As this property does not affect any functionality, this property can be change at any time – to include setting the string to an empty string. |
| Properties | Resource Properties | Situational | When the device profile is not associated to any device, reading or event, this field can be modified.  Because the ValueType and ReadWrite properties of this field are required, it can never be empty. |
| Attributes | map | Situational | When the device profile is not associated to any device, reading or event, this field can be modified.|
| *Device Command Properties* ||||

> | Name | string | Situational | When the device profile is not associated to any device, reading or event, this field can be modified.  It can never be blank and must be unique across the entire profile. |

Reviewer: Same as with DeviceProfile - `Name` is currently needed as well as `ID `to identify the device and can't be updated _"'id' and 'deviceName' must be populated in order to identify the device. If the 'notify' property is set to true, the device service managing the device will receive a notification. Any other property that is populated in the request will be updated. "_

| IsHidden | bool | Anytime | This field allows the device command to be exposed (default) via the command service.  This change does not affect the behavior but only visibility.  This field is optional but is false by default when not provided.|
| ReadWrite | string | Situational | When the device profile is not associated to any device, reading or event, this field can be modified.  This field is required.  As the field is expected to be from an enumeration of R, W and RW, it can never be empty. |
| ResourceOperations | array | Situational | When the device profile is not associated to any device, reading or event, this field can be modified.  This field is required and can never be empty. |

 
### Empty Profile

> A device profile can begin life “empty” - meaning that it has no device resources or device commands, but only when the profile is not associated to any device, event or reading.  As soon as it is associated to any other EdgeX object, it must have at least one device resource.  Device commands are always optional.

Reviewer 2: why can't users add a Device with an empty Device Profile?

Author: I was informed (can't remember by who) that a profile with an empty set of device resources, etc. would create problems in the device service.  However, this is current state as I understand it.  So if we wish to allow devices with profiles and no device resources and provide the appropriate checks to allow this to work, I am ok with it.

Question might be - why?  Why would anyone want a device without device resources.  An empty device profile serves as a place holder, but an actual device without device resources??? Would the device just be a placeholder too then?

Author: I added a section to cover the "summary" statements made by Cloud above

Reviewer 2: I don't see my summary is added to the ADR.  It looks like we just block the profile changes when it is associated to something.  Why don't we add those new API?  If we only support to update the whole profile (PUT API), why do we create the table in this ADR?
If the empty profile cannot be used, why do they need a placeholder?  If we have those Device Resource and Device Command creation API, an empty profile can be used by a Device.  Then the device resources and device commands can be added in the future.

Author: _I don't see my summary is added to the ADR._ 
  Added your proposed APIs in **proposed design section**

_It looks like we just block the profile changes when it is associated to something._ 
correct - as stated in the summary

_Why don't we add those new API? If we only support to update the whole profile (PUT API), why do we create the table in this ADR?_
So you are not allowing a change to an attribute or a property (for example)?  Rather you are only allowing for the add/delete of a device resoruces or device commands?  Why not offer a PATCH to these fields?  I added a to be determined note in the API proposed design section to raise this.

The table helps to make clear the allowed changes (independent of any API).  APIs should be written to codify what's in the table (once it is agreed upon) - regardless of which API or HTTP operation.  

_If the empty profile cannot be used, why do they need a placeholder?_ 
It can be used.  We said in the table that the profile's resources and commands can be modified until it is associated to an object.  At which point, then new resources or commands can be added.  I made this change to the document.

_If we have those Device Resource and Device Command creation API, an empty profile can be used by a Device. Then the device resources and device commands can be added in the future._
Agree - per above and as stipulated in the table.  I added more text around this to make it clear.

| Manufacturer | string | Anytime | As this property does not affect any functionality other than profile query, this property can be changed at any time – to include setting the string to an empty string. |
| Description | string | Anytime | As this property does not affect any functionality other than profile query, this property can be changed at any time – to include setting the string to an empty string. |
| Model | string | Anytime | As this property does not affect any functionality other than profile query, this property can be changed at any time – to include setting the string to an empty string. |
| Labels | string array | Anytime | As this property does not affect any functionality other than profile query, this property can be changed at any time – to include adding, removing or modifying any of the strings in the array. |
| Device Resources | array | Situational | New device resources can always be added. Existing device resources can only be removed from the array when the device resource has not yet been associated to any reading or event.|

> | Device Commands | array | Situational | New device commands can always be added.  Existing device commands can only be removed from the array when the device command has not yet been associated to a reading or event.  Please see the device command properties for rules on modifying device commands.Device commands are optional and so the array can always be empty. |

Reviewer 2: We should not search event and reading for modifying individual Device Resource or Device Command, because we should only allowed the changes when there is no Device associated to the Profile.
As the ADR mentioned, a device is not allowed to be deleted when it is associated to an event or reading, so checking is a more efficient way.
Checking event and reading is time-consuming, and the new event might be generated during the checking.

Reviewer 2: It required the new API in core-data to just return the boolean for making sure the Event/Reading exists by source name and profile name.
Our current API will query and return lots of data.

Reviewer 3: With the GET Reading/Device/Name{deviceName}/ResourceName{resourceName} API, you could request just 1 as a test, and see if you get 0 or 1. This is laborious, as has been noted, but seems like an existing way to answer the question.

| *Device Resource Properties* |||
| Description | string | Anytime | As this property does not affect any functionality, this property can be changed at any time – to include setting the string to an empty string. |

> | Name | string | Situational | When the device resource is not associated to any reading or event, this field can be modified.  It can never be blank and must be unique across the entire profile. |

Reviewer 4: @cloudxxx8 , how does changing the "key" impact anything is there are not ant references to it?

> | Name | string | Situational | When the device resource is not associated to any reading or event, this field can be modified.  It can never be blank and must be unique across the entire profile. |

Reviewer 2: when you send out a PATCH request, it might look like
PATCH /api/v2/deviceprofile/name/{profile name}/deviceresource
```
{
  "name": "resourceA",
  "description":"the new one"
}
```

The implementation need to query the "resourceA" device resource and modify the "description".
If the users want to modify the name, how do we know which device resource should be modified?
We encountered the same situation, and we decided to make the `name` cannot be updated in all kinds of objects.

The workaround is to put the device resource original name to the URL, but it is not consistent to other APIs

> | Name | string | Situational | When the device resource is not associated to any reading or event, this field can be modified.  It can never be blank and must be unique across the entire profile. |

Author: Changed to Never change based on Cloud's notes above.

| IsHidden | bool | Anytime | This field allows the device resource to be exposed (default) via the command service.  This change does not affect the behavior but only visibility.  This field is optional but is false by default when not provided. |
| Tag | string | Anytime | As this property does not affect any functionality, this property can be changed at any time – to include setting the string to an empty string. Note: adding or removing a tag could effect queries; that is the same query by tag could return different results if a tag is added or removed between query calls.|

> | Properties | Resource Properties | Situational | When the device resource is not associated to any reading or event, this field can be modified.  Because the ValueType and ReadWrite properties of this field are required, it can never be empty. |

Reviewer 2: The property should not be changed if there is a Device associated this Profile.

> | Attributes | map | Anytime | The attributes have no impact on existing readings, events, etc.  They only impact how readings are acquired by the service.|

Reviewer 2: Attributes is the representation of the Device Resource, such as an address.
When users query a Reading, they might check Profile to see what this Device Resource is referring to.
Thus, it should not be changed if there is any Device associated to this Profile.

Author: @lenny-intel , @cloudxxx8, @tonyespy  - we can't say that device profiles can change even when associated to an event or reading and then say attributes can't change.  Which is it???

During the last core working group call, there was agreement that because the event/reading contained the profile name, resource name and even the value type (and because events/readings were short lived) we would allow device profile changes even when associated to an event/reading.  

This note from Cloud would contradict that.  It would say that once attached to a event/reading, a user may want to use the association to that specific device profile with its specific device resources to get additional attribute details.  Therefore, it can't change.

Which is it?  Allow profiles to change regardless of event/reading association or don't allow them because of the need to get at other device profile associated sub objects???

Reviewer 5: @jpwhitemn I didn't attend the last Core WG meeting due to a conflict.

> 
During the last core working group call, there was agreement that because the event/reading contained the profile name, resource name and even the value type (and because events/readings were short lived) we would allow device profile changes even when associated to an event/reading.

Really (hopefully this wasn't based on my comments)? That seems like a big about face, and is in fact contrary to the wording at the top of this ADR which states:

`Allow changes to device profile or device resource fields when the field is inconsequential to the object's use (ex: description) or when it is not yet associated to another EdgeX object. These changes are listed as Anytime or Situational accordingly in the table below.`

I think if we do make this about face, that we ought to consider adding units to the readings too.

| Description | string | Anytime | As this property does not affect any functionality other than profile query, this property can be changed at any time – to include setting the string to an empty string. |
| Model | string | Anytime | As this property does not affect any functionality other than profile query, this property can be changed at any time – to include setting the string to an empty string. |
| Labels | string array | Anytime | As this property does not affect any functionality other than profile query, this property can be changed at any time – to include adding, removing or modifying any of the strings in the array. |
| Device Resources | array | Situational | When the device resource is not associated to any reading or event, the device resource list can be modified (i.e., adding or removing the associated device resources).  Once the device resource is associated to a reading or event (directly or indirectly via device command), only new resources can be added to the array.  Deleting is prohibited.|

> | Device Commands | array | Situational | When the device command is not associated to any reading or event, the device commands list can be modified (i.e., adding or removing the associated device commands).  Once the device command is associated to a reading or event, only new commands can be added to the array.  Deleting is prohibited.  Device commands are optional and so the array can always be empty. |

Reviewer 4: @tonyespy , I assume you didn't mean to change `Device Commands` to `Device Resources`

| *Device Resource Properties* |||
| Description | string | Anytime | As this property does not affect any functionality, this property can be changed at any time – to include setting the string to an empty string. |
| Name | string | Situational | When the device profile is not associated to any reading or event, this field can be modified.  It can never be blank and must be unique across the entire profile. |
| IsHidden | bool | Anytime | This field allows the device resource to be exposed (default) via the command service.  This change does not affect the behavior but only visibility.  This field is optional but is false by default when not provided. |

> | Tag | string | Situational | As this property does not affect any functionality, this property can be changed at any time – to include setting the string to an empty string. |

Author: Added a note.

> | Properties | Resource Properties | Situational | When the device resource (directly or indirectly through device command) is not associated to any reading or event, this field can be modified.  Because the ValueType and ReadWrite properties of this field are required, it can never be empty. |

Reviewer 5: I think you can leave out the "(directly or indirectly through device command)". Readings always specify device resources. Events can specify both.

> | Properties | Resource Properties | Situational | When the device resource (directly or indirectly through device command) is not associated to any reading or event, this field can be modified.  Because the ValueType and ReadWrite properties of this field are required, it can never be empty. |

Reviewer 5: `MediaType`?

> | Properties | Resource Properties | Situational | When the device resource (directly or indirectly through device command) is not associated to any reading or event, this field can be modified.  Because the ValueType and ReadWrite properties of this field are required, it can never be empty. |

Reviewer 5: I also would argue that since some of the properties are actually used to calculate the value of readings, changing some of them (e.g. `Mask`, `Shift`, `Scale`, `Offset`, `Base`) could mean two readings with identical values might've been calculated differently.

> | Properties | Resource Properties | Situational | When the device resource (directly or indirectly through device command) is not associated to any reading or event, this field can be modified.  Because the ValueType and ReadWrite properties of this field are required, it can never be empty. |

Author: Because there seems to still be some discussion here, I've left this one open to discuss in the Core WG.  Also, since we don't enumerate Properties here, by fact that some are Situation (whether ValueType or others) then Properties as a whole are situation.  Or we have to list out all the properties and say which are allowed to change and which are not.

> | Properties | Resource Properties | Situational | When the device resource (directly or indirectly through device command) is not associated to any reading or event, this field can be modified.  Because the ValueType and ReadWrite properties of this field are required, it can never be empty. |

Reviewer 5: Also please note that modifications to `ValueType` don't actually have an impact on existing readings because readings have a local `ValueType` which is set from the device resource `ValueType` when the reading is created. The same applies to `MediaType`. Most of the other properties (including `Units`) can only ever be accessed via the device resource.

IMHOP the simplest approach would be all or nothing (i.e. if the resource has been used/associated w/an event or reading**) don't allow any properties to be changed other than `ReadWrite` and `Assertion`. One could also argue that `Minimum`, `Maximum`, and `DefaultValue` also fall into this category.

** Note, I realize the reason we don't want to allow changes in this idea that we don't want referential integrity issues, however I'll point out that our Core Data persistence is (a) optional and (b) meant to be cleaned up periodically, so I'm not sure what problem we're trying to solve by ensuring that no changes occur to the device resource if these short-term readings are available from Core Data. Perhaps as part of our _Units of Measure ADR_, we also propose that units get added to the readings, which means our readings are self-describing (i.e. they'd contain `ValueType`, `Units`, and `MediaType` if the reading is binary). All of the other properties have to do with how readings are created (e.g. `Base`, `Mask`, `DefaultValue`, ...), how they can used (e.g. `ReadWrite`), or whether they trigger an error (e.g. `Assertion`).

> | Properties | Resource Properties | Situational | When the device resource (directly or indirectly through device command) is not associated to any reading or event, this field can be modified.  Because the ValueType and ReadWrite properties of this field are required, it can never be empty. |

Reviewer 4: > so I'm not sure what problem we're trying to solve by ensuring that no changes occur to the device resource if these short-term readings are available from Core Data.

@tonyespy , I have been thinking the same. If Core Data isn't persisting or Events/Readings have be removed then none of the rules with respected to associated Events/Readings matter...

> | Properties | Resource Properties | Situational | When the device resource (directly or indirectly through device command) is not associated to any reading or event, this field can be modified.  Because the ValueType and ReadWrite properties of this field are required, it can never be empty. |

Author: Per Core WG meeting of 1/13/21 - changing to allow change to profile anytime the profile is not attached to a device or provision watcher.  Event and reading association doesn't matter since these objects carry the profile, resource name and value type already and because these are short lived objects.

| Attributes | map | Situational | When the device resource (directly or indirectly through device command) is not associated to any reading or event, this field can be modified.|
| *Device Command Properties* ||||

> | Name | string | Situational | When the device command is not associated to any reading or event, this field can be modified.  It can never be blank and must be unique across the entire profile. |

Reviewer 5: See comment above, device commands are only ever referenced by events.

| IsHidden | bool | Anytime | This field allows the device command to be exposed (default) via the command service.  This change does not affect the behavior but only visibility.  This field is optional but is false by default when not provided.|
| ReadWrite | string | Situational | When the device command is not associated to any reading or event, this field can be modified.  This field is required.  As the field is expected to be from an enumeration of R, W and RW, it can never be empty. |

> | ResourceOperations | array | Situational | When the device command is not associated to any reading or event, this field can be modified.  This field is required and can never be empty. |

Reviewer 5: Same as previous

Reviewer 5: But do we really want restrict this? What if I have any existing device command called `ReadAll`, and I add a new device resource. Shouldn't I be able to extend my command?

The general properties of a device profile, with the exception of name, are optional when creating an empty profile.

All profiles – even empty profiles – must have name.                                                                                 

### Deleting Profiles

A profile can only be deleted from metadata when the profile (or its device resources or device commands) is not associated to any other EdgeX object to include device, provision watcher, event or reading.

### Association Changes

Today, a device profile is associated to a device via its name (the ProfileName on the Device struct).  The profile can also associated to events and readings (via the ProfileName in the Event and Reading objects).

Profiles can be associated to more than one device.  Profiles can be associated to multiple events/readings.

Rules about change of a device profile association have never been explicitly defined.  While the section above outline what can/cannot be changed in the profile and under what circumstances, this section outlines whether a device, event or reading can alter the associated device profile and under what circumstances.

> Change of the device profile on a device – never allowed unless there are no events or readings in the system associated to the device profile or its device resources or commands.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Change of the device profile on a device – never allowed unless there are no events or readings in the system associated to the device.
```
IMO, is there are no Event/Reading for the Device I should be able to change it.

A provision watcher also has an association to a device profile.  However, the device profile is only used to know the type of device to create in case of provisioning.  Therefore, if a device profile changes, it does not impact the provision watcher.

> A device profile cannot be deleted while it is associated to a provision watcher

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A device profile cannot be deleted while it is associated to a provision watcher.
```

> Change of the device profile on an event or reading is never allowed.  Events and readings are immutable.

Reviewer 5: Should we say the same thing about `Event.SourceName` and `Reading.ResourceName` in the appropriate sections?

Reviewer 4: @tonyespy , IMO, this statement can be removed since it isn't updating a profile.

### Applicability

This document dictates the rules around allowed change to device profiles (and associations).  All EdgeX services will abide by these rules (implementing appropriate checks and validation as necessary to enforce the rules) when this ADR is approved to include:

> - service APIs

Reviewer 5: If the checks are made by the service APIs, then it doesn't matter which services or applications are involved...

Author: Fixed the wording.  The intent was to make sure the other services or UI or CLI don't put in their own validation/checking which could be incorrect and/or redundant.

- user interfaces (like the Edge GUI)
- client tools (like the EdgeX CLI)

## Proposed Design

The following metadata API changes are suggested as a means to implement the device profile rules of this ADR.

> - Block Device DELETE when there is any associated event/reading exists.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Block Device DELETE/PATCH when there is any associated event/reading exists.
```

Reviewer 5: This ADR doesn't really mention any rules for modification of devices, so not sure `PATCH` should be included here, unless we add additional rules?

Reviewer 4: @tonyespy , agreed and think this line should be removed for same reason. i.e. nothing to do with the profile.

- Block Profile (Upload) PUT when there is any associated device/event/reading exists.

> - Block Profile DELETE when there is any associated device/event/reading exists.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Block Profile DELETE when there is any associated device/provision watcher/event/reading exists.
```

- Allow empty Profile POST (containing no device resources or commands)

> - Add Profile General Property PATCH API

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Add Profile General Property PATCH API (allow as described above)
```

- Add Profile Device Resource POST API

> - Add Profile Device Resource PATCH API (allow to modify Description and IsHidden only)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Add Profile Device Resource PATCH API (allow to modify as described above)
```

> - Add Profile Device Resource DELETE API (check it's not associated to any device, reading or event)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Add Profile Device Resource DELETE API (allow as described above)
```

- Add Profile Device Command POST API

> - Add Profile Device Command PATCH API (allow to modify Description and IsHidden only)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Add Profile Device Command PATCH API (allow as described above)
```

> - Add Profile Device Command DELETE API (check it's not associated to any device, reading or event)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Add Profile Device Command DELETE API (allow as described above)
```

## Decision

TBD

## Consequences/Considerations

> No validation on a device profile PUT will occur based on the terms above.  If you want to add a new device resource, you use the add device   resource API (POST).  You cannot add a device resource through device profile PUT calls unless there are no devices associated to the device profile.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
No change validation on a device profile PUT will occur based on the terms above.  If you want to add a new device resource, you use the add device   resource API (POST).  You cannot add a device resource through device profile PUT calls unless there are no devices associated to the device profile.
```

Reviewer 5: Hmmm, I'd rather see us not allow device resources or commands to be added via `PUT` at all as we were told implementing the checks are hard, and we can't just trust the end-user that there are no devices associated...

Author: I added @lenny-intel suggested "change" word.  I listened to the recording several times.  We went back and forth on PUT vs PATCH.  @cloudxxx8 - can you weigh in with your preference in the comments here and why again here and we'll finalize in the Core WG meeting.

Reviewer 4: @tonyespy , agreed. Maybe should be `detailed change validation` , i.e. it does what it currently does which is only allows if no associated device, provision watcher or event.

I didn't want `No validation` to be taken as it doesn't do the standard request data validation, which we are not chnaging.

Reviewer 5: I would still prefer if we only had one way to modify device profiles. It seems crazy to have some API methods perform fine-grained validation, and other global APIs (eg. device profile PUT) only offer course-grained validation. I think we're overthinking this...

Reviewer 2: @tonyespy for example, if the user just want to add a new Device Command to provide different Device Resource aggregation, they have to query the existing big profile (it might contain 1000 Device Resource) and edit the file to add one Device Command section, and call the PUT.  It's much more crazy.

# Rules on Changes to a Device Profile

## Status

** Proposed **
(as of 10/11/21)

## Context

While the device profile has always been the way to describe a device/sensor and template its communications to the rest of the system, over the course of EdgeX evolution there have been changes in what could change in a profile or its associations.  This document is meant to address the issue of change surrounding device profiles in EdgeX going forward.

### Summary of Allowed changes

A detailed look at the allowed changes to device profile and its device resources is listed below.  In general, here is what we are trying to allow/prevent via these rules:

> - Block the DELETE of a device profile when it is associated to any other EdgeX object (device, reading, event) **always**.

Author: added.

- Allow changes to device profile or device resource fields when the field is inconsequential to the object's use (ex: description) or when it is not yet associated to another EdgeX object.  These changes are listed as `Anytime` or `Situational` accordingly in the table below.
- Allow the addition of new profiles, device resources, device commands, etc. **always**.  Additions may be accomplished via POST or PATCH depending on the change and API.

See [Proposed Design section](#proposed-design) section below for specific metadata API changes.

> While not explicitly covered in this ADR, a device is not allowed when it is associated to an event or reading.

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure what you mean by this? Seems like something got left out here?

Author: Sorry @tonyespy - you are correct.  Cut and paste error that I am correcting.  should be "a device is not allowed to be deleted when it is associated to an event or reading"

### Profile Changes

The table below outlines the current elements of the EdgeX device profile, and the circumstances allowed for change (accomplished via PUT update API call - whether that is add, update or delete elements where applicable).

| Device Profile Property | Type | Allowed Change | Description/Comments |
|-------------------------|------|----------------|----------------------|
| *General Properties* ||||
| Id | string | Never | This uuid is generated by EdgeX and uniquely identifies the profile. |
| Name | string | Never | This required property must be unique to the EdgeX instance and cannot be changed.  The profile name can never be empty and must be unique across the entire EdgeX instance. |

> | Manufacturer | string | Anytime | As this property does not affect any functionality other than profile query, this property can be change at any time – to include setting the string to an empty string. |

Reviewer 5: can be change --> can be **changed**

> | Description | string | Anytime | As this property does not affect any functionality other than profile query, this property can be change at any time – to include setting the string to an empty string. |

Reviewer 5: can be change --> can be **changed**

> | Model | string | Anytime | As this property does not affect any functionality other than profile query, this property can be change at any time – to include setting the string to an empty string. |

Reviewer 5: can be change --> can be **changed**

Reviewer 5: Note, seems like this phrase was copied to almost all of the fields, but I'm not going to flag every single instance. Please replace all instances where applicable.

Author: yep - my bad.  Fixed all.

> | Labels | string array | Anytime | As this property does not affect any functionality other than profile query, this property can be change at any time – to include adding, removing or modifying any of the strings to the array of labels. |

Reviewer 5: to the array of labels --> in the array

Author: changed

> | Device Resources | array | Situational | When the device profile is not associated to any device, reading or event, the device resource list can be modified (i.e., adding or removing the associated device resources).  Once the profile is associated to a device, reading or event, only new resources can be added to the array.  Deleting is prohibited.|

Reviewer 5: **suggest**: ...the device resource list can be modified (i.e., adding, modifying, or removing resources).  Once the profile is associated to a device, reading or event, only new resources can be added to the array.  Deleting or modifying existing resources is prohibited.

> | Device Commands | array | Situational | When the device profile is not associated to any device, reading or event, the device commands list can be modified (i.e., adding or removing the associated device resources).  Once the profile is associated to a device, reading or event, only new commands can be added to the array.  Deleting is prohibited.  Device commands are optional and so the array can always be empty. |

Reviewer 5: Same as previous comment (i.e. you need to mention modifications)

| *Device Resource Properties* |||
| Description | string | Anytime | As this property does not affect any functionality, this property can be change at any time – to include setting the string to an empty string. |

> | Name | string | Situational | When the device profile is not associated to any device, reading or event, this field can be modified.  It can never be blank and must be unique across the entire profile. |

Reviewer 5: Isn't there a single namespace for all device resource names (i.e. it's not just unique w/in the profile itself)?

| IsHidden | bool | Anytime | This field allows the device resource to be exposed (default) via the command service.  This change does not affect the behavior but only visibility.  This field is optional but is false by default when not provided. |
| Tag | string | Situational | As this property does not affect any functionality, this property can be change at any time – to include setting the string to an empty string. |

> | Properties | Resource Properties | Situational | When the device profile is not associated to any device, reading or event, this field can be modified.  Because the ValueType and ReadWrite properties of this field are required, it can never be empty. |

Reviewer 5: Shouldn't we allow modification of `ReadWrite` property at any time? Changing this doesn't change the definition of the resource, it just changes what operations area allowed to be performed on this resource.

> | Attributes | map | Situational | When the device profile is not associated to any device, reading or event, this field can be modified.|

Reviewer 5: Shouldn't we allow new attributes to be added?

| *Device Command Properties* ||||

> | Name | string | Situational | When the device profile is not associated to any device, reading or event, this field can be modified.  It can never be blank and must be unique across the entire profile. |

Reviewer 5: Same question as with device resources regarding uniqueness...

| IsHidden | bool | Anytime | This field allows the device command to be exposed (default) via the command service.  This change does not affect the behavior but only visibility.  This field is optional but is false by default when not provided.|

> | ReadWrite | string | Situational | When the device profile is not associated to any device, reading or event, this field can be modified.  This field is required.  As the field is expected to be from an enumeration of R, W and RW, it can never be empty. |

Reviewer 5: Same as above

> | ResourceOperations | array | Situational | When the device profile is not associated to any device, reading or event, this field can be modified.  This field is required and can never be empty. |

Author: Re:  "We should be able to modify/delete resources not used in a reading or event even when the profile is associated to a device, reading or event."

I am ok with this.  It makes for a bit more complex of a check when the modify/delete operation occurs but I believe we have the APIs in core data to make the checks"

I am going to make this change but am willing to reverse this if others can provide reason why this would be problematic.

 
### Empty Profile

> A device profile can begin life “empty” - meaning that it has no device resources or device commands.  Once associated to any object (device, event, reading) then, since device resource or device command additions can be made, the empty profile can gain resources or commands.  You can never remove device resources or device commands once the profile is associated to another object.

Author: per above - agree

The general properties of a device profile, with the exception of name, are optional when creating an empty profile.

All profiles – even empty profiles – must have a name.                                                                                 

### Deleting Profiles

A profile can only be deleted from metadata when the profile is not associated to any other EdgeX object to include device, provision watcher, event or reading.

### Association Changes

Today, a device profile is associated to a device via its name (the ProfileName on the Device struct).  The profile can also associated to events and readings (via the ProfileName in the Event and Reading objects).

Profiles can be associated to more than one device.  Profiles can be associated to multiple events/readings.

Rules about change of a device profile association have never been explicitly defined.  While the section above outline what can/cannot be changed in the profile and under what circumstances, this section outlines whether a device, event or reading can alter the associated device profile and under what circumstances.

> Change of the device profile on a device – never allowed unless there are no events or readings in the system.  There is too much risk that an existing event or reading also contains the device profile reference – causing complexity in knowing what information is in the event/reading.

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure I understand the justification here? If a device's P`rofileName `is changed, the new profile will be used to generate new events and readings. Since the existing events and readings still reference the old profile (which can only change according to the given rules), it still would be possible to retrieve additional information from the profile if needed by an application.

Reviewer 4: Agreed.

A provision watcher also has an association to a device profile.  However, the device profile is only used to know the type of device to create in case of provisioning.  Therefore, if a device profile changes, it does not impact the provision watcher.

A device profile cannot be deleted while it is associated to a provision watcher

Change of the device profile on an event or reading is never allowed.  Events and readings are immutable.

### Applicability

This document dictates the rules around allowed change to device profiles (and associations).  All EdgeX services will abide by these rules (implementing appropriate checks and validation as necessary to enforce the rules) when this ADR is approved to include:
- service APIs
- user interfaces (like the Edge GUI)
- client tools (like the EdgeX CLI)

## Proposed Design

The following metadata API changes are suggested as a means to implement the device profile rules of this ADR

> - Block Device DELETE when there is any associated event/reading exists.

Reviewer 5: Given that short term persistence of events/readings is less of requirements these days, does this restriction really make sense?

Author: As long as we do have persistence, I would maintain yes.  Otherwise you have referential integrity issues.

As an alternative, we could offer some sort of configuration option that would allow these types of delete/updates and not be concerned with references (remember we used to have a configurable check of metadata before persisting event/reading), but that seems like a lot of work for this.  

Another alternative is to offer delete of associated event/readings when you delete the associated device - but our APIs would allow a user to do this on their own.

Reviewer 3: I wonder about enforcement, similar to Tony's question. If people implement (in their services, not the SDK) by a simple-minded, blunt approach, would it be OK? Eg, if the device service EVER published ANYTHING from the profile, it considers the profile "dirty" and won't allow the profile to be deleted, or won't allow any of it resources to be deleted?

> - Block Profile (Upload) PUT when there is any associated device/event/reading exists.

Reviewer 5: The swagger for a device profile put says that it "allows updates to an existing device profile". If so, why is this being blocked? I'm also not sure what `(Upload)` means in this context?

Author: This is where we are trying to align on rules.  Updates of a profile should have only been allowed when a profile was not associated to anything.  This was not checked in the current system (and why the UI was able to bypass)

Upload means to upload a file (versus post or put JSON).

Reviewer 5: I thought in our last discussion that enforcing profile rules via `PUT` was hard, which is why we decided to add the helper APIs?

> - Block Profile DELETE when there is any associated device/event/reading exists.

Reviewer 4: Same short term persistence of events/readings comment by @tonyespy above but for the Profile

Author: Again - disagree on the basis of ref integrity.  Regardless of how long the data is around, we should not have object references which are not correct.  An adopter can always use the APIs to remove event/readings (or devices) before removing or modifying the profile and that data is ephemeral to them.

- Allow empty Profile POST (containing no device resources or commands)
- Add Profile General Property PATCH API
- Add Profile Device Resource POST API

> - Add Profile Device Resource PATCH API (allow to modify Description and IsHidden only)

Reviewer 4: Should allow all properties if situation is ok.

Author: agree per @tonyespy.  Waiting for feedback from @cloudxxx8

- Add Profile Device Resource DELETE API (check it's not associated to any device, reading or event)
- Add Profile Device Command POST API

> - Add Profile Device Command PATCH API (allow to modify Description and IsHidden only)

Reviewer 4: Should allow all properties if situation is ok

Author: agree per @tonyespy. Waiting for feedback from @cloudxxx8

> - Add Profile Device Command DELETE API (check it's not associated to any device, reading or event)

Reviewer 5: If we already have a PUT API for profiles, why do we need to add all these individual APIs? Can't someone do all of the above actions via profile PUT?

Reviewer 4: Or Patch??

Reviewer 2: The whole PUT API will be blocked if there is any Device associated to the Profile.
Those small APIs could be applied to Device Profile which is associated to the existing Devices.

Author: Could we not separate validation logic from the API?  Meaning that we have one API PUT, and if someone attempts to change elements of a profile that are not allowed to be changed, then the PUT is rejected.  But if someone called the API to just set the Description, for example, it would be allowed.  The API remains constant, but the validation logic underneath determines whether the PUT is accepted and sends appropriate error message when it it is rejected.

Reviewer 2: If we use only one PUT API, users have to send the whole profile every time for modifying one device resource description.
If we add a single profile PATCH API, Device Resource and Device Command are sub-object, according to the convention of our PATCH API, users should still send all the Device Resources to update one description.

> *Note* - to be determined: how to allow for device resource or device command changes (outside of Description and isHidden) when the device profile is not yet associated to any object

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure what this means?

Reviewer 4: Should be allowed.

Author: This note is based on earlier exchange in this PR between @cloudxxx8 and I.  Cloud had provided for no means to change the device resources or device commands.  I feel (and I think @lenny-intel is agreeing) there should be (given that the profile is not yet associated to any object).  Cloud - any reason why we shouldn't be able to change the resources or commands?

Reviewer 2: If the Device Profile is associated to any existing Devices, Resource or Device Command not be changed.
However, modifying Description or IsHidden should be fine.

Reviewer 4: > If the Device Profile is associated to any existing Devices, Resource or Device Command not be changed. However, modifying Description or IsHidden should be fine.

@cloudxxx8 , we are say the opposite, i.e. not associated to any existing Devices, Resource or Device Command, so should allow change.

Reviewer 2: I see, you are right
-> not associated to any existing Devices, Resource or Device Command, so should allow change.

## Decision

TBD

## Consequences/Considerations

The metadata device profile PUT and DELETE APIs must contain the validation logic per the terms above.

- [Device Profile PUT](https://app.swaggerhub.com/apis/EdgeXFoundry1/core-metadata/2.0.0#/default/put_deviceprofile)
- [Device Profile Upload PUT](https://app.swaggerhub.com/apis/EdgeXFoundry1/core-metadata/2.0.0#/default/put_deviceprofile_uploadfile)
- [Device Profile DELETE](https://app.swaggerhub.com/apis/EdgeXFoundry1/core-metadata/2.0.0#/default/delete_deviceprofile_name__name_)

> The device PATCH API must validate that device profile is not changed unless there are no events or readings in core data

Reviewer 5: Shouldn't this say "validate that the device is not changed"? I'm not sure what the device PATH API needs to check that it's profile isn't being changed?

Author: The thinking here is that if you have a device and it is already associated to events/readings (and therefore those events/readings are associated to the profile and its device resources) what would it mean to change the device's device profile?  You would then have events/readings that say they are associated to a profile and device resources that are not associated to that profile or device resources anymore.  It would be a referential integrity issue again.  

Unless we want to say that an event/reading's association to the device, profile, and device resources is, after the time of creation, not guaranteed to necessarily be associated to one another again after the initial creation.  This seems problematic when the event/reading gets to the north side and someone needs to get more metadata information but the associations are ephemeral.
